---
Layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title: 
categories: []
date:  2023-12-02
---

**December 2, 2023.** *New site introduction.*

<div style="background-color: #212433 ; padding: 20px; border: 0px solid
grey; line-height:1.5">
Look at the pattern this seashell makes. The dappled whorl, curving
inward to infinity. That's the shape of the universe itself. There's a
constant pressure, pushing toward pattern. A tendency in matter to
evolve into ever more complex forms. It's a kind of pattern gravity, a
holy greening power we call <i>viriditas</i>, and it is the driving force in
the cosmos. Life, you see… <br>

<br>
And because we are alive, the universe
must be said to be alive. We are its consciousness as well as our
own. We rise out of the cosmos and we see its mesh of patterns, and it
strikes us as beautiful. And that feeling is the most important thing
in all the universe—its culmination, like the color of a flower at
first bloom on a wet morning. It’s a holy feeling, and our task in
this world is to do everything we can to foster it. <br>

<div style="text-align: right">— Kim Stanley Robinson, <i>Green Mars</i>
</div>
</div>

I'm David. My [old site](https://hapax.github.io/) got a bit
cluttered, so I decided to pick up stumps and move to a new one.
I like patterns.
KSR articulates, more clearly than I ever could,<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
	   That is not for lack of <a href="https://heptarch.github.io/assets/reality/">trying</a>.
	   </span>
how patterns connect us, by use, mention, and that pun from one to the
other that is science, to the rest of the universe.
I think *viriditas* extends well beyond science, but the goal of this
site is to focus on science—particularly the hard sciences
of math, physics, and computing—and try to make them accessible to a
broader audience.

I'll be revealing more about projects as they develop. A few I'm
particularly excited about:
- a book;
- a YouTube channel;
- new research projects;
- and a couple of fun tech-related things.
