---
Layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title:  "Self-reflexive instance-naming"
categories: [Recursion, Linguistics]
date:  2022-12-01
---

**December 1, 2022.** *A whimsical post on naming things named after an instance after an instance.*

---

Some general phenomena are named after specific instances.
For instance, a [mondegreen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mondegreen)
is a misallocation of word boundaries, with "Lady Mondegreen" a
misallocated variant of "laid him on the green".
Another example is the
[Baader-Meinhof effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency_illusion),
where something is encountered, apparently for the first time, then suddenly noticed everywhere.<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
	  In 1994, a man called Terry Mullen
wrote to a newspaper to describe such an experience with the
[Marxist guerilla group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_Army_Faction). In
another beautifully self-referential moment, this
caused an epidemic of
similar occurrences.</span>
For our purposes, the most important example is the
[eggcorn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eggcorn): a semantically
motivated mishearing, named for "eggcorn", a cute but infelicitous
rendition of "acorn".

We can lump these under the general heading of "instance-naming"
(distinct from synechdoches or metonyms where whole may stand for part
as well as vice-versa). A few months ago, I set myself
the challenge of self-reflexively naming the phenomenon after an instance, and became
promptly stuck. How could I name it after an instance without getting
confused with the original referent? And if I came up with a new term,
how could it refer to an instance? It seemed impossible. I forgot about this
puzzle until a plane flight last week, where lack of
other amusements forced me to solve it.

The idea is simple: punningly allude to an instance so as to indicate both the
general phenomenon of instance-naming, and a specific example. After
some experimentation, I struck on the idea of modifying "eggcorn" to
"egcoin", which literally means "a new word based on an
example". As a semantic equation:

$$
\text{egcoin} = \text{e.g. (example)} + \text{coin (create a new word)}.
$$

It gets better: on hearing
"egcoin", someone might mistakenly suppose they had heard "eggcorn".
This makes "egcoin" an eggcorn precisely when it is heard as such!
