---
Layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title: "Creative applied research: lessons from Bell Labs"
date:  2024-01-17
---

**February 6, 2024.** *This little essay records some tentative
thoughts on what made Bell Labs so successful as an "institute of creative technology", why
that success has been so hard to replicate, and how one might attempt
replication in a distributed, self-organized, small-scale fashion.*

Bell Labs was a cool place. Over the course of a century, its researchers invented/discovered
lasers, the transistor, information theory, modern cryptography,
error-correcting codes, the Cosmic Microwave Background, electron diffraction, photovoltaic cells,
quality control, CCDs, optical fibres, `UNIX`, `C`, support
vector machines, the Fast Fourier Transform, Grover search,
and Shor's algorithm, among other innovations too numerous to name.
What made it special? Money, to begin with. Bell Labs operated
under the auspices of a state monopoly, so no one had to hustle for
grants, venture capital, or quarterly revenue.

But most steadily funded researchers don't win a Nobel Prize or a
Turing Award. By itself money doesn't make good research; it's something you worry about when there isn't
enough!
Of course, good industrial research is expensive, and more money
means more talent, more equipment, and more time. But outcomes are not
linear in these, and from a quick survey of well-heeled
Ivies or the moonshot factories of Big Tech,
its clear that money does not buy Bell-level success.
I think the special sauce was not material—the cash flow or the
personnel or the supply of oscilloscopes—but philosophical.

## Contents <a id="toc" name="toc"></a>

1. <a href="#sec-1-1"><i>The Kelly gang</i></a>
2. <a href="#sec-1-2"><i>Fine-tuned freedom</i></a>
3. <a href="#sec-1-3"><i>Recipe for successipe</i></a>
4. <a href="#sec-1-4"><i>More cowbell</i></a>
5. <a href="#sec-1-5"><i>Scaling down</i></a>
6. <a href="#sec-1-6"><i>Rebel labs</i></a>

## 1. <a href="#toc">The Kelly gang</a><a id="sec-1-1" name="sec-1-1"></a>

"Institute of creative technology" was a line used by Mervin Kelly, director of research from 1936
to 1943, and later president.<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
   See <a href="https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/pdf/10.1098/rspa.1950.0140">"The Bell
   Telephone Laboratories-An Example of an Institute of Creative
   Technology"</a> (1950), Mervin Kelly. All quotes of Kelly are from this source.
	   </span> A physicist by trade, Kelly played a
pivotal (though not quite Nobel-worthy) role in the invention of the transistor, and as
president, helped develop the laser and the solar cell.
He was the scientist-manager par excellence; to paraphrase Falstaff,
he was not only the cause of research in himself, but the cause that
research is in others.
At the same time, his views on scientific management would terrify a
modern CEO. Fundamental research was a "non-scheduled
area of work", so the scientists did not have to jump through the
corporate hoops of OKRs, deadlines, or progress reports.
No hustle, no crunch; just research.

The buildings were designed to facilitate cross-talk, stimulation, and
focus. Kelly oversaw that geomancy as well. As he 
put it: "We give much attention to the maintenance of an atmosphere of
freedom and an environment stimulating to scholarship and scientific
research interest. It is most important to limit their work to that of
research." An ill-framed objective or a quarterly review might
distract from their real job.

Of course, to meet the technical needs of a giant like Bel, someone
had to keep track of what was going on, and do something with the
research. Once a fundamental research project reached maturity, it would be handed over to a development team. In
Kelly's words: "This pattern repeats itself again and again. A
research programme is initiated. Then as new knowledge that gives
promise of worthwhile application is obtained, a fundamental
development team is activated. It builds a background of basic
technology under the watchful eye and with the consultative aid of the
men of research." Researchers consulted, but were strictly forbidden
from helping to develop their research, lest they "lose contact with the
forefront of their field of scientific interest".

Development was only one of a number of concentric layers of
deployment, including systems engineering, facilities development, and
operations.
It's clear that Bell put a tremendous amount of effort into
structural policy and effective divisions of labour.
But these divisions really only imposed boundary conditions;
what happened within a division would be governed by differential equations set by
management.
Kelly could have treated his researchers as boffins in need of
practical guidance, or drones requiring coercive instruction.
It happens.
Instead, as the transistor episode shows, he saw them as 
collaborators, and directed their efforts with superb managerial and technical
nous. He lead from the inside.

One might be inclined to view this "institute of creative technology"
as a lucky and unrepeatable confluence of factors.
But Kelly directed Bell Labs for less than 10 years; there were many Kellys. The only way to
sustain success at that level for a century, I would argue, is to
marry material stability and good structure with a philosophy of
creative applied research that works.
Kelly gives us hints about this philosophy, but to help fill out the
negative space, we can look at institutions which do
*not* give rise to exceptional applied research.

## 2. <a href="#toc">Fine-tuned freedom</a><a id="sec-1-2" name="sec-1-2"></a>

The Institute for Advanced Study has more material
security, more on-paper freedom, more vertiginously abstract ivory tower, than one could poke a
tenured chair at.
But its eminent faculty and promising young postdocs are there, respectively, by
postselection (what they did before they arrived) and preselection
(what they will likely do after they leave); not much happens at the
Institute itself. As Feynman memorably put it: "Nothing happens
because there's not enough real activity and challenge: you're not in contact with the
experimental guys. You don't have to think how to answer questions
from the students. Nothing!"<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
	   From <i>“Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!” Adventures of a
	   Curious Character</i> (1985), Richard Feynman.
	   </span>
The IAS is too far removed to have an impact on reality.

At Bell Labs, Kelly made sure the theorists were in contact with the
experimentalists by literally building their offices next to each
other.
People would talk, share problems, and create interest groups across
disciplinary lines. The solid-state group that invented the transistor
started as an informal study session lead by William Shockley.
Claude Elwood Shannon might ride his unicycle down
the hallway to talk to Tukey, Bardeen or Richard Hamming, before
retreating into solitude; the metallurgists taught the chemists a cool
trick about polymer synthesis, and later that day, a chemist nerdsniped a materials physicist. Magic would happen.

But it wasn't just a critical mass of talent and cross-fertilizing
expertise: the research was ultimately grounded in the ever-shifting
operational requirements of the world's largest telecommunications
enterprise.
This did not literally mean solving Bell's operational conundra;
rather, through good management and institutional structure,
researchers would use their freedom to obey Paul Graham's dictum: “live in the future, then build what's
missing".
Or, as Kelly put it, the idea was to provide "the coupling between the
ever-advancing forefront of pure science and the forward march of our
communications technology. The closer the coupling, the more
completely will we keep in step with the progress of science."

This is worlds away from the enfeebled freedom that Feynman
lampooned. The freedom to think, sure, but about what?
In contrast, if you're put on a team with a problem-rich domain of
inquiry, told to get darn good at it, talk to your colleagues, think
big, ask stupid questions, and go test things out in the lab down the
hall, you end up with an institute of creative technology and not of
advanced study.

This sounds great and all, but by the metric of domain complexity, Big Tech should be the new Bell Labs. Epitomized by
MAMAA (Meta, Amazon, Microsoft, Apple and Alphabet), Big Tech does
indeed have patents, papers and products aplenty, with a track
record we can read off Nasdaq.
But despite the billions of dollars they pour into applied computer
science, these companies share only seven Turing Award recipients between them,<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
	   And a few of these recipients, e.g. Yann LeCun, did their most
	   highly cited work at Bell Labs.
	   </span>
while Bell Labs had nine.
Arguably, this a problem of timescale; like the Nobel,
Turing Awards tend to arrive long after the fact. In twenty
years, I bet we will see more MAMAA employees on the honour
rolls.

But I wouldn't bet on too many more. The simple reason is that
Turing awards are not a good investment, and in the cutthroat
landscape of technoprogressive disruption, you "move fast and break
things" or you die. You don't have time to sit around doing
fundamental algorithms research. This capitalist realpolitik explains
why, for instance, Alphabet is making massive cuts to its "moonshot factory" `X`.
It also explain why research groups in MAMAA and beyond have aggressively
pivoted into generative AI.
Transformers are interesting, but a solved problem from a fundamental
science perspective; the rest is engineering, albeit lucrative and
difficult. <label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
I'm exaggerating a little, especially because much of the basic
science <i>was</i> done in the Big Tech setting. See <a
href="#sec-1-4">§2.4</a> for more on this.
	   </span>

With a state-backed monopoly, this realpolitik didn't apply to Bell.
The product ensured a healthy supply of capital and research
questions, a “problem-rich environment” as one employee said.
but the research was decoupled from the profitability of
the system it served.
Employees could afford to fail, could afford to dream, could afford
to talk to people outside their comfort zone and explore low-entropy
connections; the product didn't govern the outcome, dictate the
process, or provide the yardstick for success and failure.
In Big Tech, the product *is* the outcome, the process, and the metric.

## 3. <a href="#toc">Recipe for successipe</a><a id="sec-1-3" name="sec-1-3"></a>

So, to state it crudely, the IAS is all freedom and no application,
and Big Tech is all application and no freedom.
Creative applied research needs both. Collecting our observations so
far, we can list a few key ingredients in Bell's recipe for successipe:
- Academic freedom
- Material security
- Problem-rich domain of application
- Robust division of labour
- Enforced focus
- Enforced cross-disciplinary interaction
- Collaborative management

This seems pretty good, but I'll admit, there are some major questions
it doesn't answer:
- What motivated researchers?
- How did managers intervene in or guide research?
- How was research coupled to the realities of the communications systems?

I suspect the answers lie somewhere between the
operational realm and the mysteries of human behaviour.
Hire smart people, give them money, equipment, and fun problems to
work on, and your output will probably depend sensitively on *who you
choose*. Like scouting and talent development in professional sports,
building a winning team requires more than deep pockets; you need sharp
eyes and a gut instinct for how the different parts of the team
will gel.
As Brattain once said of the transistor research group, “It was
probably one of the greatest research teams ever pulled together on a
problem.”
It's hard to overstate the importance of collaborative synergy in big science.

Richard Hamming, a Bell Labs luminary, describes what he views as the
right sort of personality type: "But I can say there is a pretty good correlation between those who
work with the doors open and those who ultimately do important things,
although people who work with doors closed often work harder. Somehow
they seem to work on slightly the wrong thing---not much, but enough
that they miss fame."<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
   See <a
   href="https://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/YouAndYourResearch.html">"You
   and Your Research"</a> (1986), Richard Hamming.
   </span>
That openness is how collaboration and discovery happens. Claude
Elwood Shannon, the father of information theory, may have been a lone
wolf, but he was modest, curious, and intellectually receptive in other ways.

The last two questions probably have the same answer.
To couple the state of the art in
communications systems to the state of the art in pure science, somebody had
to know the former. That would be the director of research.
As Jon Gertner puts it in his wonderful book,<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
	   <i>The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of American
	   Innovation</i> (2012), Jon Gertner.
	   </span>
“the managers themselves had to keep track of how the technology
and politics and finances of their endeavour meshed together.”
The
researchers, on the other hand, were tasked with being domain experts in the latter. So
the coupling arose via interactions between the director,
lab heads, and the constituent scientists.
This was, incidentally, another set of concentric layers that ensured
proper focus and divorced research from profit.
Putting it all together, we have a crude recipe for creative applied research.

## 4. <a href="#toc">More cowbell</a><a id="sec-1-4" name="sec-1-4"></a>

Of course, this raises the question: if Bell Labs made innovation systematic, why haven't its
results been systematically reproduced elsewhere? IBM and Microsoft
have tried, with some luck. I don't think Kelly's management was
a lucky confluence, but maybe there was a lucky confluence, namely
Bell Labs itself; I mean, you don't get a state-sponsored mandate to a
develop a whole new realm of technology every day!
Big Tech tries to develop new realms, but without mandate
in a prohibitively competitive environment.
The IAS gives a mandate, but an empty one.
Money and freedom aren't enough; you need a mandate with substance.

You might conclude pessimistically that Bell's mandate of
substances---to build a nation-wide telecommunications infrastructure---and the
freedom and money that came with it, are basically unrepeatable.
But I'm not sure I buy it.
Or rather: I'm not sure anyone else wants to.
Big Tech doesn't like the ROI on Nobel Prizes, and for that matter,
neither does Small Tech, whose heterogenous landscape of startups
relies on ready revenue and ROI-haunted venture capital to operate.
The moonshot factories like `X` are perhaps too disconnected from
domain of application; that's why you get quirky projects like the hyperloop
or [Loon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loon_LLC), cute,
brilliant, and totally unnecessary. The perfect fodder for
[`xkcd`](https://xkcd.com/)!

Plenty of universities and state labs do creative applied research,
but it's small and disconnected. Part of the magic of Bell was in the scale and
connectivity. We can do a little back-of-the-envelope calculation to
see why this is important. Suppose you have $n$ research groups, most
of which to most of the others. Then the number of connections scales
as $O(n^2)$. There are $\binom{n}{2} = n(n-1)/2$ connections
altogether. If profitable connections are distributed at random along
edges, e.g. there is a chance that a good idea lies along an edge
between two groups, then you have an $O(1)$ chance of finding it. If
all groups speak to some $O(1)$ number of other groups, or some group
speaks to most others, you have an $O(1/n)$ chance of finding
it. Finally, if only a few groups speak to a few others, the
chance is $O(1/n^2)$. I would wager that most universities live in
$O(1/n^2)$ regime, and state labs in the $O(1/n)$ regime. The odds of
finding those creative overlaps are not good.

An interesting exception is OpenAI, which (in my view) does seem to
have a "culture of repeatable innovation" to unironically quote Sam
Altman. I'm not sure how things work there, but I suspect that
starting as a non-profit hardcoded some kind of decoupling between product
and research into the company structure. It also had a Lawful Good
mandate for a provocatively difficult problem domain.
In a field like AI, the benefits of cross-fertilization
between adjacents domains are probably pretty obvious, particularly as
multimodal AI comes into its own. So, I suspect that the different
teams of OpenAI are in the $O(1)$ regime for probability of
discovering something new. I'm not sure about the other ingredients in our
<a href="#sec-1-3">successipe</a>---these may be neither nor sufficient---but
it seems plausible that OpenAI's structural quirks are part of what
makes it special.
I guess we'll see how that culture of innovation holds up under the
pressures of Big Tech rockstardom.

## 5. <a href="#toc">Scaling down</a><a id="sec-1-5" name="sec-1-5"></a>

In lieu of a state monopoly or an idiosyncratic Silicon Valley
non-profit, will these guidelines be applicable? I
think so, and at smaller sizes than you might expect. Armed with the
insights above, let's revisit the ingredients in our
successipe, and see how it scales down:

1. *Freedom.* Academic freedom means that researchers and not
managers initiate research. As in a university setting, this isn't a
license to do anything; it's trust and permission within scope. This can be
implemented even in a small team.

2. *Security.* This one is trickier. As we've discussed above, in a tech
   setting stable funding is hard to come by, and in most universities,
   even tenure is no guarantee of money. But this is the first place
   where separation of concerns becomes important; the researchers
   should not be the ones hustling for money, developing, or selling
   the product. They should get paid to research. Professors tend to
   be miserable project managers, and the same is true in industry.
   
3. *Separation.* The benefits of a robust division of labour should,
   by this point, be clear. Don't saddle researchers with business
   problems, just pay them to think and give them what they need. For
   that to feasible, you need to have good managers to couple science
   to commerce, and teams to perform development, integration, and so
   on. Keep them separate, but with well-defined and performant
   interfaces. An early-stage startup of, say, five people is probably
   too small to separate this way, but $100$ is plenty.
   
6. *Focus.* The goal is clearly separating research from its
   application is focus. Researchers work best when their bellies (and
   wallets) are full, and they get to have fun with their
   problems. But, as Kelly realized, to keep up with the
   frontier you need to move fast; you can't afford to be
   distracted. This is a subtle business, because what looks like
   distraction to the manager can be unconscious insight for the scientist. This is
   where scope and domain become important.
   
4. *Domain.* A stimulating problem domain guarantees a supply of
good research questions, and that coupling to the scientific
state-of-the-art Kelly was so concerned with. In fact, most industrial
domains harbour unsolved scientific problems; we know much less than
we think! In addition to stimulating scientific innovation, a good
domain also helps draw the line between distraction and freedom
judiciously employed. You think homotopy type theory might shed some
light on this problem? By all means. Managers shouldn't
try to hustle the outcome, but instead guide and nurture the process.

5. *Mandate.* Of course, even when a domain is stimulating, if
   approached without urgency and a sense of mission, it is likely to
   yield lacklustre results. That is why
   mandate is important. It gives you a problem to solve, and the
   responsibility to solve it; a collective and personal stake in
   something that will make a difference. This contrasts with
   splendid ivory-tower isolation, where (if you're lucky!) your
   results only matter to a handful of other experts.

7. *Interaction.* Speaking of other experts, the hardest ingredient
   to replicate at a small scale is the effect of cross-disciplinary
   chatter and all-to-all connections. With six groups, you have
   fifteen edges to explore; between two groups, only one. In smaller
   teams, I think the natural answer is in-house specialization, where
   different researchers play the same role as different
   teams. Another solution is to build rapport with external research
   groups; although better than nothing, like university
   collaborations it tends to suffer from suboptimal scaling in $n$.
   
8. *Management.* If researchers are encouraged to focus and become
   domain experts, some of the cross-fertilization has to be
   coordinated from above. In turns, this requires technical maturity
   and vision, the insight of scientist-managers like Kelly. As grumpy
   professorial PIs show us, not every scientist is cut out for this role;
   nor should they be. Some people are better at research, some at
   management, and some in between, and industry has the unexpected
   luxury of choosing people for the roles they are best at. Ironically, there may be more "pure"
   academic freedom in industrial R&D than the groves of academe!
   
9. *Talent.* Kelly emphasized the importance of quality hires, of recruiting
   scientists of "the same high quality as required for distinguished
   pure research in our universities". But there is as much managerial
   nous to scouting, building, and managing teams for scientific
   research as there is for professional sports, even if
   conventional ideas about genius (and conventional institutional
   arrangements) obscure this fact. Successful teams of any size are
   based on having the  right people, with the right management, for the right task.

10. *Coupling.* The impact of applied research is
related to how effectively coupled the research is to the problem
domain. That, in turn, bubbles out of an alchemy of multiple elements. I can't
put it better than Kelly: "Years of experience have taught us that the type and quality of men selected for
our research, the environment that we provide, and the distance in their work that
we ask them to penetrate beyond the forefront of creative technology are the most
important factors in determining the closeness of coupling—the
effectiveness." It evades mechanization because
it seems that, after all, creative technology is an art and not a science.

All things considered, I see no reason why the recipe should not be
*attempted* at a smaller scale and in less propitious circumstances. Maybe it
is or has been, with indifferent
results, and the experiment abandoned.
But I wonder if it's simply unpopular to sink large capital outlays into
unpredictable outcomes like lasers that benefit everyone, including your
competitors.
I guess you pays your money and you takes your choice.

## 6. <a href="#toc">Rebel labs</a><a id="sec-1-6" name="sec-1-6"></a>

So, let's agree that this approach is due for a
revival. How do we manufacture a monopoly, or conjure up a steady
stream of coin? We can't. Maybe sprawling, shiny facilities for $O(n)$
labs, with robust all-to-all chatter? Nope. In lieu of top-down
technocapital benefaction, I wonder if it's possible to implement a
partial feature set from the bottom up. What might this look like?
Well, let's try following the recipe we worked so hard to cook up.

A good first step is to gather a bunch of smart people(*talent*) who
work well together, like to share ideas, and have a wide range of expertise (*interaction*). Give them a
hard applied problem to work on (*domain*), induce a sense of
mission<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
	   Perhaps because the problem is urgent and unsolved. Or
	   might lead to a cool startup. Or fame and glory. Or cookies. People are motivated by different things.
	   </span> (*mandate*), and give them the permission (or perhaps the
	   obligation!) to creatively explore the domain as their antennae
	   dictate (*freedom*).
Distribute the effort via the magic of the internet, with tools for
collaboration, feedback, and a high but not prohibitive threshold of
participation (*focus*); people need to stay engaged, but not so
engaged that they can't afford to remain involved (*security*).<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
Doing this solves the problem of security because people stay without
having to pay them!
</span>

In this self-organized, downscale setting, having a managerial hierarchy
doesn't make much sense. But somebody should take responsibility
for coordinating different strands of research to ensure that, like an orchestra
conductor, the different voices harmonize (*management*). Ideally, this
individual---we'll use the non-hierarchical term "convener"---is good
with people, has a global sense of the domain so the research folks
don't have to (*separation*), and finally, knows how to work the
channel between the abstrusities of research and the real-world use
case (*coupling*). Maybe the coupler and the convener could be
different people, if the project gets large enough, but at first will probably
both be whoever kickstarted the thing.

All this may seem quixotic, but it's analogous to a very common
phenomenon: open-source software. Coders around the world come
together to create beautiful things, for free, in a distributed,
self-organized way. The biggest difference between open-source
software and the kind of science I'm describing is probably the
sustained mental effort involved in the latter. I *hope* I'm being a
chauvinist about this, because if I am, it means "open-source science"
is even more feasible than I thought!<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">
I think the modern scientist has an unfortunate habit of waiting for
institutional blessing before thinking.
</span>

So, this essay has really been a lengthy preface to a sales pitch: why
not try the Bell Labs model in an open-source setting? I call this **Rebel Labs** for obvious reasons.
I've put some example projects on the [lab](/lab) page; these are all
things I am tentatively working on, and will add more details
soon. But the point, the projects will be a lot better if smart folks
take interest and get involved! I don't think we'll invent the laser,
but then again, who knows.
